
.. _test-rn:

Test and Verification Issues
============================

New Features and Resolved Issues in Mirantis OpenStack 6.0
----------------------------------------------------------

* OSTF deployment tests now work without failures in
  for Murano environment.
  See `LP1392257 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1392257>`_.

* OSTF tests go successfully; no Keystone database error occurs.
  See `LP1380530 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1380530>`_.

* During Fuel Master node deployment, OSTF
  container check is finished without failures.
  See `LP1361730 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1361730>`_.

Known Issues in 6.0
-------------------

Network verification issues
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* Network verification can fail if a node is offline
  because Astute runs network verification
  but Astute does not know which nodes are online.
  See `LP1318659 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1318659>`_.

* The network verification checker does not test OVS VLANs.
  See `LP1350623 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1350623>`_.

OSTF (Health Check) issues
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* Platform OSTF tests fail with "HTTP unauthorized" error.
  See `LP1349408 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1349408>`_.

* 'Create volume and attach it to instance' OSFT does not work.
  See `LP1346133 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1346133>`_.

* OSTF provides wrong failure message for ping probes.
  See `LP1323433 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1323433>`_.

* "Request image list" OSTF test fails for environment with 'error' status.
  See `LP1330458 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1330458>`_.

* During OSTF tests, "Time limit exceeded while waiting
  for 'ping' command to finish" message appears.
  See `LP1339691 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1339691>`_.

* After update, Sahara OSTF tests are displayed in HA suite instead of Platform test.
  See `LP1357330 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1357330>`_.

* After resetting the environment, OSTF test results from the last
  environment are still displayed.
  See `LP1338669 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1338669>`_.

* Some OSTF tests do not give descriptive message when they fail.
  See `LP1371051 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1371051>`_.

* RabbitMQ OSTF test performs only "rabbitmqctl cluster_status".
  No full functionality is checked by OSTF. See the related
  `RabbitMQ OSTF replication tests <https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/ostf-rabbit-replication-tests>_`
  blueprint.

* When using Ceph volumes or images, "Create volume and boot instance from it" OSFT test fails.
  See `LP1385828 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1385828>`_.
