
.. _nsx-rn:

VMware NSX integration
----------------------

New Features and Resolved Issues in Mirantis OpenStack 6.0
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* In HA mode on NSX machine, OpenStack deployment no longer crashes due to
  unavailable Neutron and Keystone services.
  See `LP1369529 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1369529>`_.

* vCenter as a Hypervisor and NSX as a networking option are now fully supported
  in Fuel 6.0.
  See
  `vCenter NSX support <https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/vcenter-nsx-support>`_.

* OpenStack deployment process on the second controller of NSX machine no longer
  fails. See `LP1368728 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1368728>`_.

* Support of **non-Service node** mode is now enabled for NSX.
  See `LP1365043 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1365043>`_ and
  :ref:`nsx-plan`.

* NSX deployment now does not crash
  due to *invalid argument gateway* error.
  See `LP1389317 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1389317>`_

Known limitations in 6.0
++++++++++++++++++++++++

The VMware NSX integration into Mirantis OpenStack 6.0 is supported,
but it has some known limitations:

* Deployment interruption (stoppage or reset) by end user or errors during
  deployment leave NSX cluster in half configured state.  User has to manually
  remove all network logical entities that were created during the unsuccessful
  deployment; otherwise, the next deployment will fail due to inability to
  register OpenvSwitches in NSX and 'br-int' bridges on nodes would not be
  configured properly, because older ones with same names exist in NSX cluster.

* If the NSX cluster resides in a separate network that has L3 connectivity with
  the OpenStack Public network, you must enable Public address assignment for all
  nodes, see :ref:`neutron-nsx-arch`.

* When there are no NSX settings, Fuel UI allows clicking "Deploy changes".
  Make sure that you have specified correct NSX settings.
  See `LP1347682 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1347682>`_.

* When deploying environment with enabled NSX plugin, several problems may occur:
  for instance, if Neutron configuration did not succeed, Fuel marks this deployment
  as a successful one.
  Error messages in Puppet logs may indicate this problem.
  One more failure may take place when you try to redeploy your environment with NSX.
  In this case, before redeploying you should delete all OpenStack-related nodes,
  that have already been registered. See `LP1373403 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1373403>`_
  and `LP1373445 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1373445>`_.

* Instances failed to get IP Address on Ubuntu+NSX deployment.
  This happens, because NSX bits are incompatible with Ubuntu packages and kernel
  versions.
  See `LP1371607 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1371607>`_.

* Fuel with enabled NSX can not complete CentOS-based cloud deployment
  due to problems with Neutron. In this case,
  you will see *Can't prefetch subnet-list Neutron or Keystone API is not avalaible*
  error message.
  See `LP1392244 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1392244>`_.

* When NSX is used,
  old transport nodes created during the previous deployment
  are not removed automatically.
  See `LP1370775 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1370775>`_.
  automatically

* When node has NSX and Compute or multiple roles enabled,
  an error in puppet logs may occur.
  See `LP1393497 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/bugs/1393497>`_.
